---
title: Escape from Delhi
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "Delhi was a three-day kick in the groin. ..."
---

Delhi was a three-day kick in the groin.
 
It caught me complacent and out of travel mode, but it would’ve been a tough place under any circumstances.  The first day in particular was the most taxing day of travel I‘ve ever experienced. Driving from the airport the first night, I knew to expect the unexpected when my rickshaw nearly collided with two cows loafing around in the alley outside my hostel.  I was staying in Paharganj, a seedy neighborhood in New Delhi that’s ideal for the budget traveler. The guy at the hostel’s front desk seemed genuinely concerned that I hadn’t used the airport pickup service (“This isn’t like other countries, man”—“Of course it’s not, why do you think I’m here?” was my cocky mental reply).
 
The problem is that it’s difficult to find an objective source of knowledge that isn’t trying to mislead you to turn your dollars into some rupees for them.  This started with that first hostel, which is a participant in the classic scam of driving tourists to a private travel agency masquerading as a government office, and there trying to get them to buy a healthily expensive travel package ($3500 for a month in Northern India…fat chance).
 
Adding to the problem is that things you take for granted, like your rickshaw driver actually taking you the place you told them to, turn out not to apply in Delhi.  Trying to head back to Paharganj to find a more honest if pricier hostel, I found myself on a merry chase around downtown Delhi with a succession of rickshaw drivers who all claimed that Paharganj was just unreachable right now—there were a lot of emphatic gestures and raised voices, to make sure I was clear that my request to ride the one mile to Paharganj was absurd.  The reason varied:  the roads were closed for Ramadan, or there was a protest going on, or my personal favorite, that the prime minister of India was visiting the neighborhood for an inspection (sometimes the same driver cited more than one of these).  So instead they drove me to various travel agencies, each claiming to be government-run.  After Driver #2 and I had a falling-out, I moved on to Driver #3, who pulled over to the side of the road and leaned in confidentially. “All of these drivers are trying to make money off of you and are dishonest.  Don’t trust anyone.  Don’t trust me.”  He then ferried me straight to the seediest tourist office of the day.  I’m glad he was honest about his own dishonesty.
  
Eventually I got tired of this and made the sweatstained walk to Paharganj, which was as lacking in protests and prime ministers as it had been when I left that morning.  The morning’s wild goose chase set me back financially about $1.25, but it put a damper on my spirits and made me feel lost.  Adding to the feeling of being an antelope in the midst of travel agency jackals was the extreme self-consciousness that comes with pulling out a map or guidebook in a public place.  It’s one of the most vulnerable feelings I’ve ever experienced.
 
There were some good characters in the day’s mix, though.   There was Raj (the only Indian name I can reliably remember), who studied English in California and steered me to what I suspect was the real government tourist office after a cup of chai; the guy at Tourist Office #2, who seemed like a genuine globetrotter and gave me semi-honest travel advice; the guy at Tourist Office #3, who pulled me into his office and whispered the correct directions to a guesthouse I was investigating, because he said I reminded him of his brother (he actually asked that I not tell anyone else in the office that he had divulged accurate information); and then there was Boldo, a retired doctor and teacher from rural Bhutan who relayed his mostly incomprehensible life story to me over another cup of chai.
 
Paharganj itself is a winding bazar with some kind of activity going on in every corner, full of starving cats and pregnant dogs and guys who want to sell you hash.  It was there that I rediscovered yet again the social contract that comes with travelling to places like India:  As a foreign tourist in possession of great purchasing power and the opportunity to travel, you give up your right to go unmolested in the course of your daily activities, and cede everyone the right to try their hand at getting a few rupees out of you.  It’s just the way it is, a byproduct of monstrous inequalities; resisting is like trying to step out of quicksand.  That doesn’t mean I’m ever going to buy a pair of sunglasses from the guys standing at the corner down the street, or forgive the rickshaw drivers for their antics, but I think it’s an important perspective.  On the subject of rickshaws, I read that 700 Bangalore cops booked 3,000 rickshaw drivers and 8,000 taxi drivers in a sting operation for a variety of offenses, including taking customers to the wrong location.  So, Delhi police: Take heed. 
 
I made attempts to see Delhi over the next two days, but I chose the one day the Red Fort is closed, Monday, to make the trip into Old Delhi, accidentally stood in line for the women’s-only cars in the metro, and went in search of a park in South Delhi that I never found.  All the while I was guzzling down one two-liter bottle of water an hour, but going the entire day without having to pee.  I met a PhD student from California who lived in Delhi, and spoke great Hindi, who advised me to seek air conditioning when I asked her what to do in the city.  She taught me pani, one of my two Hindi words, which means water.
 
Delhi has palm-tree lined streets, wide sidewalks and the mix of rickshaws, bikes, motorcycles and buses that never fails to thrill me.  The thing that struck me most about the city’s appearance was that there’s no real skyline:  Even from the roof restaurant I visited twice I could only see a few scattered high-rises.
 
My last meal in Delhi was a plain lassi with plain naan.  There was a continuous stream of cricket on TV, and the waiter brought me ketchup for the naan.  If that wasn’t a sign to get out of Delhi I don’t know what was.
 
My next destination was north to Jammu on the night train.  My plan was to spend a couple weeks in the mountainous northernmost Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir.  This was hardly a unique plan:  This time of year everyone tries to go to the Himalayas, with the south flooded by the monsoons and the north-central part of the country spiking into triple-digit heat.
 
Much of J&K is Indian only officially and politically, and it must contain the most densely packed religious hubs of any region in the world:  In the south of the province is Hindu Jammu, a continuation of the rest of India; north of that is Muslim Kashmir, which bears a lot in common with Northern Pakistan; and east is the primarily Buddhist Ladakh, which is heavily Tibetan culturally.  Slightly south lies the capital of Sikhism at Amritsar.  This seemed like an interesting if un-Indian way to start my journey.
 
My 300 rupee ticket bought me a sleeper bunk, the second lowest of India’s seven rail classes.  Taking the name “sleeper” too literally would be a mistake:  The bunk affords you the opportunity to position yourself horizontally for a portion of the journey, but not much more than that.  There are six bunks in a compartment, three on each wall positioned so close above one another that sitting up is impossible.  They’re made of that hard rubbery material you see on chairs in airport waiting rooms.  Needless to say, I didn’t sleep particularly well.  Several of the bunks around me had two people in them; a man made a makeshift bed on the floor, making getting up almost impossible; and partway through the trip, an Indian family took up residence on the edge of my bunk and the one across from me, bringing the number of people in our small compartment to a full 11.
 
The Indian railway system will be a good friend of mine this trip; it crisscrosses almost the whole country, and tickets can be bought dirt cheap for distances long and short.  With one and a half million employees, Indian Railways is the world’s biggest utility employer, and it clearly fulfills its purpose of moving people en masse around the country.
 
After arriving in Jammu in the early morning, I caught a rickshaw into the uninspiring downtown, found a single guesthouse willing to take in a foreigner, realized the place was too uninspiring to stay one night, loped over to a busy strip of road crammed with vans, and hired a vehicle north to Srinagar.  As I was sitting in the back I saw a tanned blond guy with an accent negotiating with my driver.  He looked one or two years older than me.  Five minutes later we were crammed in the van together with four Indian tourists and were pulling out of Jammu.
 
