---
title: Guwahati
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "The Seven Sister States, starting from Darjeeling and moving geographically counterclockwise, are Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh.  ..."
---

The Seven Sister States, starting from Darjeeling and moving geographically counterclockwise, are Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh.  They hang off of India’s body like an ugly appendage, discontinuous with the rest of the country geographically and culturally.  Indeed, a spin of the globe reveals that their umbilical link to India may be the least congruent national border in the world.
 
To be fair, the Northeast’s awkward shape is a result of the 1947 partition, when majority-Muslim Bangladesh was hewn from under it into a new nation.  But the cultural differences that separate much of the Northeast from the rest of India are much more deeply rooted than that.  All seven states have unique indigenous populations with their own languages and customs.  The region is distinguished religiously particularly by the prevalence of Christianity: Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram are the only states in India that are majority Christian.  Most of the indigenous populations don’t look anything like other Indians, and have nothing to do with the rest of the country culturally.  Not too surprisingly, all of the Northeast States, with the notable exception of Arunachal Pradesh, have been home to robust separatist movements and sectarian violence.
 
As such, the Indian military presence is strong:  When I attended the Pakistan border ceremony at Attari, the announcer had extolled India’s Border Security Force and their deployment in “the furthest corners of our country, those distant Northeast states…”  Manipur, huddled up against the Myanmar border, is one of the most dangerous corners of South Asia:  I’d heard that Manipuri tourist vehicles routinely travel in armed convoys, so salient are the threats of drug runners and guerrilla fighters.
 
So Manipur was not on the itinerary.  Nor was Mizoram, which was a 30-hour drive from anywhere else, or Tripura, which was similarly remote and majority Hindu, and thus seemed less exotic to two India-weary travelers like me and Morgan.
 
That left four states as fair game, with no well-beaten path to inform our route.  The only obvious part was our starting point in Guwahati, a city of one million people on the Brahmaputra River in Assam and the Northeast’s only transport link to the outside world.
 
We disembarked from our Darjeeling train onto the Guwahati station platform at 3 am.  It wasn’t an auspicious beginning for our Northeast sojourn:  The weather was drizzling and the journey in sleeper class had been particularly comfortless.  We grabbed a rickshaw to the only guidebook-recommended budget hotel in the city.  After hammering the buzzer, we were greeted by the bleary-eyed proprietor, who informed us that he had no vacancies in even fewer words than that.  Despondent, we walked up and down the neighboring streets, past equally uninspiring concrete facades with big block letter signs.  Most were hotels.
 
The one we chose at random offered a lifeless double room for $12 each.  It was a sum exorbitant enough by my standards to induce an eye twitch, but I doubted we would find anything better in broad daylight, much less at 4 am.  To be fair, I had asked for this:  Here in Guwahati, for the first time on my trip, there were no backpacker guesthouses, no English menus offering banana pancakes and papaya lassis, no hint that anyone expected a tourist to cross the doorstep.  This was what I had wanted:  We had fallen off the edge of Known India.  To most travelers, Northeast India means Darjeeling and Sikkim.  At last, we were in relative terra incognita.
 
That our hotel room was the most expensive I had encountered was a necessary sacrifice.  With no backpackers to fuel demand, cheap accommodation meant mid-range business hotels.  But this and the rest of Guwahati’s reality broke all of the patterns I had fallen into:  Over the course of my trip, I always selected the $4 rooms over the $7 rooms because I never expected to spend any time in there awake, and because air conditioning never seemed to be worth the extra $3.  So long as it had a horizontal surface and no visible infestations, a cruddy room was actually a boon because it encouraged me to get out and explore.  While our hotel room in Guwahati was suitably uninspiring, for the first time venturing out was as joyless as staying in.
 
For one thing, the whole city was slick under a constant downpour, and even when the rain let up, the sidewalks were soggy and the sky was the color of old rags.  The streets around our hotel were chaotic but boring.  Guwahati was clearly a gateway, not a destination.
 
We did muster the energy for one day of sightseeing:  We caught a city bus to a hilltop half an hour out of the city, on top of which sat the area’s most prominent Hindu temple.  We stood in line at the temple for half an hour amid the worshipers, who seemed to almost exclusively be men. The temple’s exterior was painted gaudily red and draped with pooja flowers; a labyrinth of gated enclosures snaked around it, inside of which stood the lines of people waiting for entry.  A temple attendant stood guard at each enclosure and periodically ushered a few people forward into the next one.  When our turn finally came to step over the temple threshold, we walked past several severe white-robed priests and descended into the cave-like interior.  The walls of rough stone were liberally splashed with scarlet dye, an evocation of blood made more effective by the severed cow and goat heads that lay among the pooja flowers in the shrines.  The slow snaking line continued inside the temple too, so that by the time I had completed one 180 degree circuit of the main chamber, I was ready to leave.  During my pass around the main shrine, I spotted a decapitated goat’s body tucked behind a heavy stone door, which my detective work concluded matched up with a baby goat head I had spotted a few minutes before.
 
The pedestrian street that led down from the temple was lined by the elderly and infirm, a sad exhibit of every disability and disfigurement I’d ever seen, and some I hadn’t.  Over their heads and behind them were the awnings of clothing shops and cheap restaurants.  A faded sign announcing a Devotees Rest Room was in sight from the parking lot, which looked out onto a soccer field and the foggy green expanse of Assam beyond.  It wasn’t beautiful, but it was the best view I’d seen since arriving in Guwahati.  There was much to explore out there.
 
***
 
It was Morgan’s birthday that day.  This was an uninspiring place to spend it, but Morgan couldn’t help that her date of birth lined up with our arrival in Assam, so we struck out in search of a semi-reputable restaurant.
 
We found one that my guidebook certified as a $$ level establishment, a tier of dining that I would normally avoid.  When we arrived, a sign on the door announced a birthday party, but the doorman ushered us in and up the stairs, where we emerged into a large and creaky dining room that was devoid of people.  We sat at a table by the wall, lone humans amid a sea of tables that were at the ready with upside-down glasses and neatly folded napkins, awaiting nonexistent customers.
 
The thalis we ordered were some of the best I’d ever had.  At the end of the meal, for one of the first times in my life, the manager emerged to thank us for our patronage and ask after the food.  She was a young woman with glasses, and she clasped her hands in front of her slightly nervously as she explained the traditional Assamese aspects of our dishes, including a well-known tangy fish curry called tenga.  I felt like a VIP.  Between the two of us, our meal had cost $9.  Not a single other patron had come into the restaurant in the hour we’d been there, and we left it abandoned when we stepped back onto the night-lit street.
 
* * *
 
Disappointed that my first taste of the fabled Northeast had all the excitement of Omaha, I held on to the raw idea that interesting things lay ahead.  Morgan and I put our energies into planning our route.  During a rainy day in Darjeeling, we had sat in a restaurant and I had etched out a map of our prospective trip over the roof wood grain of the table.  On paper it was beautiful:  A straight line down into Meghalaya, a swift trajectory through Assam, an arc into Arunachal Pradesh and a graceful circuital finish back into Assam.  But I knew already that it might prove to be fictional.
 
Arunachal was the holy grail of our aspirations:  Sitting atop the other Northeast States, under the crushing weight of the Tibetan plateau, it is home to remote Buddhist monasteries, Himalayan vistas and richly adorned tribal minorities.  India’s final frontier.  One of the last places in the world where there are still blank spaces on the map, my guidebook claimed.  Statements like that gripped me hard.  Even the Chinese want Arunachal:  They invaded in 1962 and have never formally acknowledged India’s sovereignty over it.
 
But there were several rainclouds over our plan, one of which was the literal one of monsoon season.  It asserted itself with every sloshing step between our hotel and the cafeteria we frequented down the street.  After the third day of continuous downpour, we began to look at each other and wonder if our Northeast plans might be flooded out.  Monsoons have altered many itineraries, partly because they are so monumentally wet and partly because Westerners, like Morgan and me, tend to forget their existence or fail to keep track of their cycle.
 
The prospect of rain highlighted the reality that a trip to Arunachal was a significant investment in money and time.  Arunachal is the only state in India that requires a permit for entry; the other Northeast States did away with such permits a few years ago.  A tangle of red tape and at least $100 each separated us from our permits.  Getting past that barrier would still leave us to navigate an almost non-existent public transportation system, miserable roads, a possible dearth of budget accommodation, and an almost certain dearth of information.
 
Morgan had an Assamese friend named Rafiq, a noted bird watcher, who had travel agent contacts and whom we hoped could finagle us a cheaper deal on our permits.  We were planning to meet him at his home in Kaziranga, several hours east of Guwahati, on our way to Arunachal Pradesh.  Then, in a coincidence that would have amazed me prior to my trip, Morgan collided with Rafiq just down the street from our hotel—he had business in Guwahati and had come into the city for just a couple of hours.  He brought more bad news about Arunachal Pradesh:  Unless we paid extra, we would likely have to travel with a guide, at additional expense.
 
In the face of the rain and red tape, tired of pondering Western Union transfers and private drivers, Morgan and I shelved our decision on Arunachal and turned our attention south to Meghalaya, which was easily accessible.
 
After much splashing around, I located transportation to Shillong, Meghalaya’s capital.  The streets by our hotel were lined with travel agents, that is, guys in booths who were willing to sell you a seat in their buddy’s jeep.  So one morning, under the abuse of the tireless Guwahati downpour, we squeezed into the middle row of a Shillong-bound jeep, thigh to thigh with half a dozen other irritated passengers, leaving our backpacks at the mercy of the driver’s willingness to cover them with a tarp on the roof, and left the soggy disappointment of Guwahati behind.  At least for a few days.
