---
title: Looking for Jesus
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "The next morning, Yury and I decided to go in search of other tourists to go into the mountains with. ..."
---

The next morning, Yury and I decided to go in search of other tourists to go into the mountains with.  It was mainly my idea, but neither of us particularly wanted to linger in Srinagar and I convinced him that the experience would be better with a group.  “We make team,” he said, looking at me evenly.  “Yes, I think is good.”
 
We got lucky on our second try, which was pretty good considering that Yury’s method of initiating conversation was to approach a group of white people waving his arms and yelling “Wait!  Wait!”
 
Our new friends were three 26-year-old Argentinean girls, Maria, Mila and Celina, who had quit their jobs in Buenos Aires for a couple months of travel over here. They weren’t particularly interested in trekking, but we all wanted to spend a day exploring Srinagar, so we set off together.
 
Lonely Planet showcased a couple of attractions that looked interesting in Srinagar.  The most obvious was the Jama Masjid, a large and striking mosque in the Old City.  Because this was Ramadan, the mosque was unusually lively.  We walked through the large center courtyard to the main section, which had tall wooden pillars connecting to the high ceiling and kneeling figures in between.  The use of wood is a risky choice—the mosque has already burned down twice.  A couple of men approached us (women were in another section) and gave us a friendly overview of the mosque’s history.  More importantly, they repeatedly assured us that we were welcome to stay:  We were getting more than a few questioning glance, especially the girls, and I felt uncomfortable playing the tourist in a holy place during a holiday.
 
On the mosque’s main wall, to the right of the 99 holy names of Allah and the door to Mecca, was a large scoreboard, for lack of a better word.  This scoreboard recorded the exact times, to the minute, of the five daily prayers for Ramadan.  The largest set of numbers was a countdown timer, showing that we were just a few minutes from the 5:50 pm prayer, Asr.  As the numbers approached 00:00, men started rushing into the chamber, hastily removing their shoes and taking up position in rows facing the wall.  They were of all ages, many dressed in the Muslim white but some wearing Western clothes.  When the time came, everyone in the chamber began the prayer in synchrony, prostrating themselves and chanting.  I’d never seen this outside of documentaries or news footage; it was transfixing.  It lasted about six minutes, after which we filed out along with everyone else.
 
The next site of the day was one we all were particularly intrigued by:  There are bizarre theories dating back centuries that Jesus spent a portion of his life in Kashmir, either his lost years before he reappeared as a prophet or his time after crucifixion.  This second possibility in particular raises a lot of eyebrows and hackles in Christian parts of the world, of course.
 
Somewhere in the Old City of Srinagar exists a shrine called the Rozatbal, which a fringe group of Muslims claims holds Jesus’s body.  Finding the Rozatbal proved pretty difficult; it was down a small alleyway and very unobtrusive.  It was a low building, with a window in the side looking into what looked like a very long coffin.  In front of the coffin were two footprints in the concrete.  On the front side of the building was a cryptic sign entitled something like “What the Holy Quran says about Jesus Christ,” followed by an excerpt from the Quran in English and Urdu.  There was another sign prohibiting photography, something I have yet to see at any other Kashmiri holy site.
 
Our presence at the Rozatbal was drawing a fair amount of attention, including one young guy who enforced the second sign when Mila tried to snap a picture of the Quran verse.  An older man who spoke some English answered some of our questions.  He told us that many Muslims believe that two people are entombed in the Rozatbal, including a prophet named Youzasif (that’s what it sounded like).  Whenever we asked him about the Jesus connection, which was repeatedly, he would cringe slightly and say emphatically, “As a Muslim, I cannot say that Jesus is buried here.”
 
That was all we could milk out of the Rozatbal.  After winding our way past some sheep with dyed pink blotches on their fur, we caught a bus to the Hazratbal, one of the holiest sites in Kashmir.  On the ride over I sat next to a young man and we talked about the World Cup, one of the most accessible topics of conversation there is (the outcome was a painful subject for the Argentinean girls and was best to avoid in their presence).  My seatmate had supported Germany, he told me, because of their criticism of the USA’s support of Israel in the Gaza conflict.  This was the first of several times that I heard Kashmiris seriously disapprove of Israel, and sometimes of the US by proxy.  After disembarking, we stopped by a drink stand in front of the Hazratbal, where the server told me that the US was a “bloody country” for supporting Israel against Palestine.
 
There wasn’t much to see at the Hazratbal—it was undergoing renovations, and we weren’t allowed inside for some reason anyway.  Essentially, at one point the Hazratbal supposedly contained one of Mohammad’s hairs.  The way Yury had described it, we had half-hoped to see Mohammad’s entire beard encased in a glass display case, so it was disappointingly anti-climactic.  On the other hand, the Hazratbal sits along a really scenic arm of Dal Lake, which we enjoyed for a few minutes before turning back.  We caught a bus back seconds after a group of rickshaw drivers emphatically told us that there were no buses this time of night.
 