---
title: Camping in the Lidder Valley
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "The next day we met new friends at the girls’ guesthouse: two recent engineering grads from Montreal, David and Nick, both excellent amateur photographers who switched into French when the rest of us weren’t in on the conversation. ..."
---

The next day we met new friends at the girls’ guesthouse: two recent engineering grads from Montreal, David and Nick, both excellent amateur photographers who switched into French when the rest of us weren’t in on the conversation.  We walked to the large fort overlooking Srinagar, but the day’s main objective was to agree on a plan to get out of the city.
 
The girls had a tip from a British couple about a small cottage in the mountains two hours away.  With only the word-of-mouth recommendation and a quick phone conversation with the manager, Malik, the seven of us hired a car the next morning towards Pahalgam, 100 km east.
One unwelcome spontaneous tea break aside, our driver got us to Pahalgam fine, where Malik met us at the Indian army checkpoint outside of town.  Born very poor and still illiterate, Malik had made a career for himself as a guide in this part of the mountains, presumably getting by almost entirely on word-of-mouth advertising.  We ended up passing his information on to a Swiss-French couple.  Presently he told us that he was going to go buy dinner, and fifteen minutes later came back with four live chickens in his arms.
 
With Malik and his sons we were 11 in the car, while the chickens were stuffed under my and Nick’s seats.  They began to squawk and flap around in an agitated way, which was fine, because they tasted excellent that night.  As we drove up into the mountains we passed shepherds galloping towards their flocks and boys leading horses carrying older women in rich Kashmiri dress. Ten minutes later we were in the village of Aru, a pretty collection of small buildings in an alpine valley. This was as far as we could go by car.  Malik’s site was a 12 km hike up into the Lidder Valley in 8,000-foot thin air.  Thank god for the packhorses.  Eventually we emerged over a river and saw Malik’s cottage in front of us:  Three small blue-roofed buildings and a tent set in an incredible green valley, at the confluence of two glacial rivers, surrounded by mountains on all sides.
  
We didn’t move too far for the next three nights and days.  Nick, David and I slept in the tent, which became an oven in the morning, the girls took the cottage, and Yury pitched his tiny tent about 50 feet away, in strict keeping with his anti-tourism principles.  Every evening we built a large fire.  Six of us would sit around it eating rice, sabzi (veggies) and dal (lentils) out of metal bowls with Malik and his family.  Yury would generally be off milking a goat somewhere down the valley.  He would show up an hour later, tell of his meal with the shepherd villagers—“Super, super!”—and then regale us with a story about capturing wild horses in Abkhazia or driving a tractor around Southern India.  I’ve never met someone with so many tall tales which I’m convinced had no bullshit in them.
 
The conversation around the fire extended late into the night.  Maria and Yury, being more spiritual than the rest of us, talked about auras and human energy and things that I don’t understand at all, topics more likely to come up in India than anywhere else, I think.  Celina and Maria had done a two-week Buddhism course in Dharamsala, one of whose requirements was that they not speak for the entirety of the course.  I think this is a phenomenal idea and something everyone should try at least once, me included.  More so than anything, though, I learned all sorts of little details about life in St. Petersburg, in Buenos Aires and Montreal, which is one of the best things that can come out of travel.  I also saw my first shooting star.
 
On the second day we hiked up to a glacier 14 km away, which afforded good views of the scenery, but more interestingly, close-up views of the local shepherd people.  They were scattered around near our campsite, too.  They lived in low earthen huts with stone walls and thatch roofs.  Men were almost never visible; it was always women and young children who could be seen out and about during the day, sitting by their huts or making bread or poking their sheep and horses around.  If you woke up early enough you could see them curled asleep on the grass.  I think we were of almost equal interest to each other—there were many stares in both directions, but all the picture snapping came only from our end, of course.  I was briefly invited into one of the shepherd huts once, where I discovered what it feels like to truly, truly be stared at.  The hut was dark and smoky even during the day, and the occupants were myself and eleven sets of eyes—little kids and a couple of women—who were looking at me like they hadn’t seen anything quite so amusing or ridiculous for a long time.  I left after having a bit of bread.  Both this village and Malik’s camp were equipped with tiny solar panels, enough to charge a phone during the day.  Besides that, pictures of the valley could have come out of a National Geographic from 1975.
 
Much of our time in the Lidder Valley was a lot like camping at home—we played an excellent Israeli card game called Yanaf; David and I proudly fashioned a soccer ball out of a duct-taped wad of trash; and we dipped into the glacial rivers for one-and-a-half-second baths (Yury stayed in for ten minutes).  But the wild horses, scores of sheep and shepherd hovels with smoke pouring out of the entrances shook the fantasy that I was back home in the Cascades, as similar as the scenery was.  Finally, on the third day, it was time to leave.  The girls peeled off to leave for Amritsar, and the shrunken group of David, Nick, Yury and I returned to Srinagar.
