---
title: Ramadan and Politics in Kashmir
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "Daily life is different in Srinagar during Ramadan. ..."
---

Daily life is different in Srinagar during Ramadan.  Or so I assume, since I’ve never been there any other time.  Devout Muslims fast between sunrise and sunset, which includes not only food but water, cigarettes and sex.  As such, they have to maximize their use of the twilight hours.  I was woken up several times at 3 am by Rahim’s family smoking and having their morning meal.  I saw the younger members of the household eat during daylight, but for Rahim, his brothers and elder family members, daily life during Ramadan consists of a combination of chores, manual work and leisure.  Rahim told me that fasting is a healthy process, and I’m not convinced he’s wrong.
 
Women in Srinagar are almost invisible.  They’re not on the streets, they’re not in the shops, they’re not piloting the shikaras, and most of all they’re not talking to me.  Walking down the Boulevard in Srinagar, like in Delhi, is an exercise in responding to touts and hecklers in a firm but respectful way.  Every single one of the dozens of “Hello, my friend!”s has come from a man.  In the evening, the men of Srinagar gather around the boulevard and the docks to socialize and watch the traffic go by.  It’s like one big front porch, and a reminder that public shared spaces in the States are a thing of the past, but also an entirely male pursuit.  Even in Rahim’s house, I exchanged a few sentences with the men every time I passed one. But the women never acknowledged me, except Rahim’s mother’s two words when she brought tea and bread, and I didn’t try to strike up conversation with them either.
 
Truly devout Muslims might take fasting to heart during Ramadan, but even religiously motivated prohibition is ineffective, as we saw on our third night in Srinagar.  The seven of us paid a visit to one of Srinagar’s only legal liquor stores, which was down a narrow and unpleasant alley off of the Boulevard.  The place was nominally closed for Ramadan, and we were advised to turn back several times, but the men jogging past us with packages under their arms suggested otherwise.  When we reached the end of the alley, we saw that the providers were shoving bottles of whiskey and warm beers out of the barred windows of a low derelict building.  The customers were handing over fairly large sums of money in exchange.
 
For what it’s worth, music in cars is banned in Srinagar year-round, allegedly because it’s a traffic hazard.  I can’t believe that this music ban isn’t somehow religiously or politically motivated.  Our driver back from Pahalgam switched off “Dani California” from David’s iPod as we were approaching a traffic police checkpoint.  Auditory pollution, maybe?
 
Rahim told me that when he was my age, he’d had long hair and a girlfriend from Melbourne, and sold jewelry to tourists on the beaches at Goa.  That was a far cry from his current Muslim facial hair and dress.  He was very devout about Islam, and by extension was very interested in introducing us Westerners to his faith (“Don’t be angry, but you are blind”).  Perhaps his faith was strengthened 19 years ago, when the car he was driving towards Leh was hit by a petrol bomb thrown by anti-Muslim Ladakhi militants.  He showed me the scar on his hand from the incident.
 
The first night we met them, Yury and I brought Celina, Maria and Mila over to Rahim’s for tea.  They had some interesting but fruitless conversations about feminism and women’s place in society, but each side’s belief was so foreign to the other as to be useless.  The phrase “woman is a flower” occurred at least twice within my earshot in Srinagar, usually at times when Rahim was passing around pamphlets about Islam.  I did learn some things.  One pamphlet argued that all Muslims are “terrorists” of a sort because their faith strikes terror into the hearts of the unjust and evil, which I think is a terrible semantic mistake in light of today’s culture.  The thing I learned most was to practice tacit disagreement, and fortunately no one left the evening too wounded.
 
More revealing and interesting was the Kashmiris’ extreme sensitivity to the Israel-Palestine conflict.  By my quick observation, Israeli tourists outnumber all other nationalities in India except maybe Germans.  Rahim said there had been about 150 in Srinagar, but they had all gone home.  “They know they are doing a great wrong,” he said, shaking his head. “Why they are sending rockets into Palestine instead of going after Hamas.  Someone will find and kill them here.  That is why their government sent them home.”  This may be overstated, because we ran into an Israeli party hiking into the Lidder Valley our second day there.  But for what it’s worth, towards the end of my stay in Srinagar I noticed that we got a lot of shouts of “Israel?” walking down the Boulevard instead of other more typical greetings.  What’s more, David, Nick, Maria, Mila and Celina all looked plausibly Israeli, which we joked about but may not have been so funny after all.
 
We got a taste of the Kashmiris’ anger towards a different country on our third day.  During the night, an Indian army driver drunkenly hit and killed seven Kashmiris on the road between Srinagar and Pahalgam.  As happens not infrequently, a large strike went into effect that day:  About four-fifths of the shops lining Srinagar’s streets were shuttered, and we heard of protests near the Jama Masjid.
 
Once I asked a Kashmiri shikara driver what his favorite part of India was; it was one of my stock questions, a way to pick up tips for my travels.  “I’m Kashmiri. I don’t like India,” was his reply.
 
I’ve noticed that people in Kashmir do not age well.  With his white beard and bald head, Rahim looks 60, but he’s 45. Malik’s leathery and skinny body looks 45, but he’s 32.  Happily, his children are in school, a chance he didn’t have.
 
On the other hand, the Kashmiri people that I met were hard.  Rahim’s uncle Ali Baba is a skinny and bald old man, but he still leads tourists on the very taxing 35-day trek over the mountains into Leh.  At least he said he does.  To be honest, I think a level-headed tourist would look twice at Ali Baba before choosing him to be their guide through the western Himalayas, but who knows.
 
I realized it was time to leave Kashmir, so I bought an early morning bus ticket to Leh, 400 kilometers east in Ladakh.  I’ve started thinking in kilometers and am not sure how many miles that is.
 
Sadly, this would man I’d have to split ways with everyone that last night in Kashmir, with David preparing to fly onto Bangkok, Nick heading back home to Montreal, and Yury, ever uncertain, contemplating hitchhiking (“hijacking” as he called it, so close yet so far) to Leh or Rishikesh.
 
My last couple days in Srinagar were lazy.  David, Nick, Yury and I commandeered one of Rahim’s shikaras out into the middle of Dal Lake, where we spent the afternoon drifting around playing cards and listening to music.  We also expended some effort shaking off the boatside fruit salad and ice cream vendors, and unsuccessfully tried to pick up extra passengers for a few rupees.
 
I thanked Rahim profusely, and helped him set up a TripAdvisor account for his business, but his generosity and hospitality were unprecedented.  That last night, I disembarked a shikara to Rahim’s house to find him and Yury in the living room with three middle-aged Russian women.  They showed me pictures of explosions they had seen three days earlier up in the mountains, before they were helicoptered out by the Indian military.  The attack happened at the Amarnath cave, a Hindu pilgrimage site.  Thinking back on it, driving back from Pahalgam we passed hordes of Hindu pilgrims waiting to make the trek to Amarnath, including the traditional wild-looking long-bearded men with orange robes and walking sticks.  The violence would have happened while we were in the Lidder Valley, not too many kilometers away.
 
That night Yury also told me the full story of how he and Rahim met.  When he arrived in Delhi five months ago, Yury too got caught up in the tornado of rickshaw drivers and travel agency touts.  One of the agencies he was taken to turned out to be the one where Rahim worked, and they struck up a fast and very unusual friendship.  From his description, I’m almost positive that Rahim is an employee of the third travel agency I was taken to that day in Delhi.  Meanwhile, I’m sitting next to an Israeli guy here in Leh who I’ve run into previously both in Delhi and in the Lidder Valley.  How worlds collide here…
 
I didn’t meet a single fellow USAer in Kashmir, which honestly I think enhanced the experience.  It was the most foreign, and one of the most memorable, eight days of my life.
 
