---
title: Ladakh 3 - The Highway from Hell
date: ""
template: "post"
category: "India"
description: "Leh is connected to the outside world by only two roads: The one from Srinagar in the west and the one south to Manali. ..."
---

Leh is connected to the outside world by only two roads: The one from Srinagar in the west and the one south to Manali. Having come from Srinagar, the decision to go to Manali was simple. Moreover, the Leh-Manali highway is legendary, by far the most famous drive in northern India. Snow cuts off the route for about two thirds of the year, and the rest of the time the mountainous journey requires a dedicated 24 hours behind the wheel. Leh-Manali stories circulate through the traveler community, of busfuls of locals praying for a safe arrival and lunatic drivers taking pulls of whiskey while the bus careens around hairpin turns. Having completed the drive, I can confidently say that there are probably other roads in the Himalayas and Andes that are as bad as the Leh-Manali highway, but I highly doubt that there is any that is much worse.
 
I had booked a seat in the very back corner of the bus, because I had a big window and room to stretch out my legs. A couple hours into the ride, however, it became clear that I had picked the worst seat on the bus. Every dip or bump—and are a lot of those on an unpaved Himalayan road—put eight inches of air between my butt and the seat. By the time the road got really, really bad, we in the back seat were being launched into standing positions and I was developing bruises on my buttocks and shoulder blades. I noticed that the back seemed to be occupied by people we picked up along the way, who paid for a portion of the journey before getting off midway through. Now I know.
 
We climbed back into the mountains, and by the time it was light out we were deep into the arid heights south of Leh. Around mid-morning we stopped abruptly and everyone in front poked their heads out of the windows. I couldn’t see anything. The conductor shouted something and everyone got up and filed off the bus. Now I could see the problem: An oil truck had tipped over in the other lane near the cliff edge, blocking our way through. The ground underneath it was drenched in oil and the whole scene reeked of it. I looked around for anyone lighting a cigarette, envisioning a Zoolander-like gasoline explosion.
 
The driver tried and failed to maneuver the bus around the wreck, with the left wheels clawing at the upward slope of the mountain. After that didn’t work, a troupe of women in work garments and wrapped faces appeared and began digging at the ground in front of the bus with metal poles and rocks. It took about 15 minutes to clear a path, after which the conductor gave a blast on his whistle and we all filed back on the bus and lurched onward.
 
Local buses are known for having a leisurely pace: Every one to two hours, we would come to a halt at a little collection of tents and prefab structures along the highway, which exist only to service the vehicles that come through. Laborers with shovels and wheelbarrows squatted around, caked in dirt and in the middle of the most wretched work imaginable. These roads were clearly built on the backs of some of north India’s most destitute inhabitants. Incredibly, some of my fellow riders got off at these places, and I was hit by the realization that people actually live and work in these places.
 
In the afternoon we pulled over so the conductor could procure a metal lever and pry a rock the size of a baby’s head from the groove in our back-right tire.
 
It wasn’t too surprising—by that time we were splashing our way over little mountain rivers that fell away as waterfalls below us and grinding our way over sizeable stones. As we jolted our way along the mountain roads, over passes and down again, we came so close to the edge that I could peer out my window and gaze straight down the cliff. Occasionally we came to a hairpin turn, whereupon we had to back up onto the slope before swinging around onto the road. Every time the bus went into reverse, the speakers played a jingle to the tune of “It’s a Small World After All.” I found it quite ominous, especially when we came face to face with another large vehicle, whereupon one or both of us had to back up and pull over. It was easy to imagine us backing off a cliff while that stupid ditty played. Just once, at some point in the ride, I saw the skeleton of a large truck down in the valley far below.
 
The scenery came in stages, and by day’s end I’m pretty sure I’d seen every possible kind of mountain vista. First came the high-altitude desert peaks familiar from Leh; those eventually gave way to red cliffs and rock spires straight out of an Arizona landscape calendar, except that there were snowcapped mountains rising above them; as we climbed higher, the mountains became craggier and I caught glimpses of rows of dark snowy peaks in the distance.
 
And then, in the evening we descended from the heights into the Lahaul valley in Himachal. Describing the feel of a landscape without sounding schmaltzy is almost impossible, but I’ll give it a try: Tiers of farmland and woods descended from both sides of the valley, crisscrossed by rivers, finally reaching a larger river in the canyon far below. Perched along the slopes were tiny buildings and clusters of houses. Catching the scene at sunset probably had something to do with it, but it was one of the most beautiful landscapes I’ve ever seen.
 
With my nose pressed against the glass, we pulled into Keylong, a wide stretch of pavement surrounded by hotels with a big family of beggars living under the bus station steps.
 
I took a 100-rupee bed in the hotel next to the station, where I shared a big mattress with an older Japanese man. I ate with four French travelers from my bus, young adults from Bretagne who were half a year into their journeys. They were all very French in their mannerisms and their names—Sylvan, Stephane, Cucu—and were all chronic wanderers. They mostly worked seasonal jobs, picking grapes or repairing boats (although one worked at a “spiritual travel agency”). Most of all, they were friendly and free-spirited, so much so that they overslept and missed the 4 am bus to Manali the next morning.
 
 * * *
 
We set off at 4 am the next morning and began climbing along the winding mountain roads again. I wasn’t in the very back this time, but on the other hand, my seatmate, a skinny and balding old man in a traditional Himachali cloth hat, didn’t seem to be in the mood to make room for me when I tried to squeeze past him into the aisle. He was also prone to strange outbursts, and pretty soon the other passengers were looking at him with amusement, as at a funny inmate in a mental hospital.
 
By the time the sun rose we were passing the treeline. Then, around mid-morning, we came to a halt and the conductor irritatedly signaled for everyone to empty the vehicle. I shuffled out to where everyone else was squatting along the road. The rough terrain had torn the exhaust pipe from under the bus and left it dragging on the ground. The ensuing two-hour wait was aggravating, not least because the repair process seemed to involve tying the pipe to the bus’s underside with scraps of wire scavenged from the roadside. On the other hand, I began to admire the tenacity of the conductor and my fellow passengers. The conductor wasn’t just a glorified ticket counter—every journey was threatened by unexpected problems. And the solution always came thanks to the Indians’ ingenuity.
 
We climbed again, and the views got bigger along with the mountains. Then, not far from the pass, we came to a grinding halt. A stalled line of traffic snaked away in front of us, while another one, coming toward us, was halted farther ahead. Between the two lines was a large crowd of people and the cluttered debris of a rockslide. There were already dozens of vehicles parked along the road, their occupants either brooding inside or at the scene of the disaster. It was clear we weren’t going anywhere for a while. My seatmate began jabbering hysterically in Hindi and stumbled off the bus, while I went to check out the scene.
 
A single 4x4 was bouncing and jostling around, scooping at the fallen boulders that had submerged the road. There was probably enough debris to fill a large dump truck. The largest chunk of rock had about 20 people standing comfortably on it, and could probably have knocked any vehicle into the valley below. Fortunately, there was no sign that anyone had been in the rockslide’s way.
 
Watching the 4x4 wrestle with the boulders was surprisingly entertaining, and I wasn’t the only one who thought so. Most of the crowd of 100 or 150 people was just as interested as I was. I was particularly impressed how the vehicle cleared rocks that looked far too large for it. There were a lot of appreciative murmurs every time the 4x4, with its skinny driver bouncing animatedly in his seat and puffing on a cigarette, cleared a scoopful of rubble or nudged a boulder off of the road.
 
By the time a huge bulldozer showed up to shove the largest chunks off the cliff, the way was clear. Everyone scurried back to their vans and trucks, and we were about to set off when a couple of people in the bus gave a shout. The conductor and another passenger disembarked, and returned a moment later with my seatmate slumped between them. He had the bleary eyes of someone far gone and his breath reeked of sweet liquor. It was by far the worst breath I’ve ever smelled. He spent most of the rest of the journey collapsed against me, and I prayed for a quick end to the ride, whether by rockslide or arrival.
